









First known gene transfer from plant to insect identified





































































Skip to main content


Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
            the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
            Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
            and JavaScript.





Advertisement























View all journals




Search




My Account


Login













Explore content




Journal information




Publish with us






Subscribe







Sign up for alerts




RSS feed










nature



news




article










NEWS
                    
25 March 2021



First known gene transfer from plant to insect identified

                    Discovery that a whitefly uses a stolen plant gene to elude its host's defences may offer a route to new pest-control strategies.
                







                    Heidi Ledford
                




Search for this author in:

Pub Med
Nature.com
Google Scholar















Share on Twitter
Share on Twitter














Share on Facebook
Share on Facebook














Share via E-Mail
Share via E-Mail























Some whiteflies use plant genes to render toxins in their food harmless.Credit: Getty


A pernicious agricultural pest owes some of its success to a gene pilfered from its plant host millions of years ago.The finding, reported today in Cell1, is the first known example of a natural gene transfer from a plant to an insect. It also explains one reason why the whitefly Bemisia tabaci is so adept at munching on crops: the gene that it swiped from plants enables it to neutralize a toxin that some plants produce to defend against insects.Early work suggests that inhibiting this gene can render the whiteflies vulnerable to the toxin, providing a potential route to combating the pest. “This exposes a mechanism through which we can tip the scales back in the plant’s favour,” says Andrew Gloss, who studies plant–pest interactions at the University of Chicago in Illinois. “It’s a remarkable example of how studying evolution can inform new approaches for applications like crop protection.”The diminutive whitefly — which is more closely related to aphids than to flies — wreaks agricultural havoc around the world. B. tabaci is among the most destructive plant pests: whiteflies sup sugary sap from hundreds of types of plant, all the while excreting a sticky, sweet substance called honeydew that serves as a breeding ground for mould. Whiteflies are also vectors for more than a hundred pathogenic plant viruses.Stolen genesThat some species of whitefly could owe part of their predatory prowess to genes from other organisms is not entirely surprising, because genetic thievery is common in the arms race between plants and their pests. Over millions of years, plants and insects alike have borrowed heavily from microbial genomes, sometimes using their newly acquired genes to develop defensive or offensive strategies.Some insects, such as the coffee berry borer (Hypothenemus hampei), have plundered microbial genes to extract more nutrition from hard-to-digest plant cell walls2, and a wild relative of wheat has pilfered a fungal gene to fight off a fungal disease called head blight3. But plants and insects were not known to steal from each other before now.

Fungi borrowed bacterial gene again and again
Entomologist Youjun Zhang at the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences in Beijing and his colleagues were scouring the B. tabaci genome for stolen genes, when they found one that seemed to have evolved not in other insects or microbes, but in plants.Further study showed that the gene can transfer a chemical group on to defensive compounds called phenolic glucosides. Such compounds are made by many plants, including tomatoes, to ward off pests. But the modification caused by the whitefly gene rendered the compounds harmless.To test the hypothesis, the team engineered tomato plants to produce a double-stranded RNA molecule capable of shutting down expression of the whitefly gene. Nearly all of the whiteflies that subsequently fed on these doctored tomato plants died.That result suggests a new means of targeting whiteflies, says Jonathan Gershenzon, a chemical ecologist at the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology in Jena, Germany. “It offers an enormous chance to be specific,” he says. “You could keep the whiteflies away but not harm beneficial insects such as pollinators.”Plants-pests battleGene transfer between species can be difficult to prove, says study co-author Ted Turlings, a chemical ecologist at the University of Neuchâtel in Switzerland. To do so, Zhang, Turlings and their colleagues analysed the sequences of similar genes in plants, and determined that the whitefly gene was their evolutionary kin. The team also carried out analyses to show that the gene was integrated into the whitefly genome, and was not the result of plant DNA contaminating samples.

Antibiotics set to flood Florida’s troubled orange orchards
The results were surprising, but convincing, says Yannick Pauchet, a molecular entomologist also at the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology. “According to the data they provide, horizontal gene transfer is the most parsimonious explanation,” he says.But how the whitefly managed to swipe a plant gene is unclear. One possibility, says Turlings, is that a virus served as an intermediate, shuttling genetic material from a plant into the whitefly genome.As researchers sequence more genomes, it’s possible that they’ll uncover more examples of gene transfer between plants and animals, says Gloss. “Insects taking the genes from the plants themselves is just that last bit of the arsenal that we hadn’t found yet,” he says. “In the battle between plants and their insect pests or pathogens, there are genes being drawn from all over the tree of life.”

doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-021-00782-w


References1.Xia, J. et al. Cell https://10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.014 (2021).Article
                                        Google Scholar2.Acuña, R. et al. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 4197–4202 (2012).PubMedArticle
                                        Google Scholar3.Wang, H. et al. Science 368, eaba5435 (2020).PubMedArticle
                                        Google ScholarDownload references


Latest on:


Genetics





Rabbits that do ‘handstands’ help to find a gene for hopping
Research Highlight 25 MAR 21





Breast tumours maintain a reservoir of subclonal diversity during expansion
Article 24 MAR 21





Genomics data: the broken promise is to Indigenous people
Correspondence 19 MAR 21






Agriculture





Revamp of UK CRISPR regulation will require public trust
Editorial 16 MAR 21




Reshoring EU agriculture risks undermining SDGs
Correspondence 12 JAN 21





Genomic basis of geographical adaptation to soil nitrogen in rice
Article 06 JAN 21






Plant sciences





Developmental and biophysical determinants of grass leaf size worldwide
Article 24 MAR 21





Revamp of UK CRISPR regulation will require public trust
Editorial 16 MAR 21





Mutual potentiation of plant immunity by cell-surface and intracellular receptors
Article 10 MAR 21












Jobs from Nature Careers






All jobs









Pediatric Neuroimmunology Developmental Neuroscience Research Faculty: Pacific Northwest
Merritt Hawkins
Portland, OR, United States

JOB POST











Professor and Department Head of the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences
The University of Tennessee at Knoxville (UTK)
Knoxville, TN, United States

JOB POST











Research Track Faculty in Human Statistical Genetics
Washington University School of Medicine (WUSM), WUSTL
St Louis, MO, United States

JOB POST











Postdoctoral Fellow
Florida Atlantic University (FAU)
Jupiter, FL, United States

JOB POST
















Nature Briefing
An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday.




Email address



Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.

Sign up





Related Articles








                                                
                                                Thousands turn out to support science in Italy’s stricken olive region
                                            









                                                
                                                Antibiotics set to flood Florida’s troubled orange orchards
                                            





                                                
                                                The bitter battle over the world’s most popular insecticides
                                            









                                                
                                                Fungi borrowed bacterial gene again and again
                                            





Subjects

Genetics

Agriculture

Plant sciences













Sign up to Nature Briefing
An essential round-up of science news, opinion and analysis, delivered to your inbox every weekday.




Email address



Yes! Sign me up to receive the daily Nature Briefing email. I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.

Sign up




















Close banner






Close






Sign up for the Nature Briefing newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily.





Email address


Sign up



I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy.











Close banner






Close



Get the most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox.
Sign up for Nature Briefing
            














Explore content



                                    Research articles
                                



                                    News
                                



                                    Opinion
                                



                                    Research Analysis
                                



                                    Careers
                                



                                    Books & Culture
                                



                                    Podcasts
                                



                                    Videos
                                



                                    Current issue
                                



                                    Browse issues
                                



                                    Collections
                                



                                    Subjects
                                


Follow us on Facebook
                            


Follow us on Twitter
                            



Subscribe



Sign up for alerts




RSS feed







Journal information



                                About the Journal
                            



                                Awards
                            






Publish with us



                                For Authors
                            



                                For Referees
                            


Submit manuscript







Search



Search articles by subject, keyword or author





Show results from

All journals



Search








                    Advanced search
                


Quick links

Explore articles by subject
Find a job
Guide to authors
Editorial policies









                    Nature
                

ISSN 1476-4687 (online)
                









nature.com sitemap





About us
Press releases
Press office
Contact us





















Discover content

Journals A-Z
Articles by subject
Nano
Protocol Exchange
Nature Index



Publishing policies

Nature portfolio policies
Open access



Author & Researcher services

Reprints & permissions
Research data
Language editing
Scientific editing
Nature Masterclasses
Nature Research Academies



Libraries & institutions

Librarian service & tools
Librarian portal
Open research
Recommend to library



Advertising & partnerships

Advertising
Partnerships & Services
Media kits
Branded content



Career development

Nature Careers
Nature  Conferences
Nature  events



Regional websites

Nature Africa
Nature China
Nature India
Nature Italy
Nature Japan
Nature Korea
Nature Middle East



Legal & Privacy

Privacy Policy
Use of cookies
Manage cookies/Do not sell my data
Legal notice
Accessibility statement
Terms & Conditions
California Privacy Statement










© 2021 Springer Nature Limited






















\
        







